rules_gapic/README.md, before:

## GAPIC Generator [Bazel](https://www.bazel.build/) Integration 

### Requirements

- Bazel version `0.16.0+` (with `--experimental_enable_repo_mapping` turned on).
- Linux (may work on other platforms, but this haven't been tested).

### Usage

The rules will call `gapic-generator` and do all the necessary pre- and post- generation steps to generate a fully-functional client library for a specified service API in a specified language (currently only `Java` is supported). The rules are expected to be used from within a Bazel workspace containing service interface definitions in one of the following formats: 
- **`proto/grpc`** format, defined by `<service>.proto`, `<service>.yaml` and `<service>_gapic.yaml` files; see [googleapis](https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis) repository for an example.
- **`discovery/httpjson`** format, defined by `<service>.json` and `<service>_gapic.yaml`; see [discovery-artifact-manager](https://github.com/googleapis/discovery-artifact-manager) repository for an example. 

### Rules and Macros

#### Cross-language
1. **`gapic_srcjar`** - cross-language (main) **rule** which calls gapic-generator, supplies necessary input files to it (like `gapic_<service>.yaml`, `<service>.yaml` or `discovery_doc.json` in case of discogapic generation). Notice that `artman_<service>.yaml` (googleapis), `dependencies.yaml` and `api_defaults.yaml` (gapic-generator) and `package_yaml2` (generated by artman from artman and service yamls) become obsolete (not required at any stage). The chosen name tries to follow Bazel best practices, in which a rule name must be a noun, which represents the output of the rule.
2. **`proto_custom_library`** - cross-language **rule**, which allows: 1) calling `protoc` with custom plugins; 2) specifying the output files format and file extension (essential for consuming (down the chain) rules); 3) accepting `proto_library` targets as inputs (to adhere to Bazel protobuf best practices and stay consistent with everything else). Unfortunately Bazel does not have native support for the features above and a similar rule in protobuf repo [proto_gen](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/protobuf.bzl#L173) satisfies the 1st requirement/feature but not the other two.  Notice that this rule does not replace `proto_library`, it is additive to it (it uses `proto_library`'s output as input, while `proto_library` has raw proto files as input).
3. **`proto_library_with_info`** - cross-language **macro**, which wraps `proto_custom_library` and provides "fat" proto descriptor. This is not supported by native `proto_library` rule but is required by gapic-generator to include documentation from protos and to overcome the limitation of "only one" desc file as an input in gapic-generator (dependencies' proto descriptors must be supplied somehow, here they are embedded in one big descriptor which then goes to gapic-gen as input).

#### Java
1. **`java_gapic_srcjar`** - java **rule**, which does all the java-specific post-processing of the java gapic-generator output (produced by `gapic_srcjar` rule). This includes running formatter and splitting output into main and test packages (a design decision/assumption made, but it is essential (though not strictly required) for proper building of the artifacts within Bazel).
2. **`java_gapic_library`** - java **macro**, which subsequently calls `gapic_srcjar` to generate sources, then `java_gapic_srcjar` to post-process them, then  native `java_library` (twice, one for main and one for tests) to build java binary lib from the generated output within Bazel. This is **the rule**, which intends to put gapic-generator on same level of tools integration as protoc (`java_proto_library`) and grpc (`java_grpc_library`).
3. **`java_discogapic_library`** - java **macro**, which is very similar to `java_gapic_library` and does same, but for discogapic libraries.
4. **`java_resource_name_proto_library`** - java **macro**, which uses `proto_custom_library` and `java_library` rules to generate resource names sources and then calls `java_library` to build the corresponding library from the generated sources. Notice that resource names can be generated and compiled as a standalone library (do not have to be  a part of `proto-<service>` library).
5. **`java_gapic_build_configs_pkg`** - java **rule**, which is responsible for generating (from templates) build-specific resources for third_party build systems (like gradle). For example it is used to generate `build.gradle` and `settings.gradle` from templates. 
6. **`java_gapic_srcs_pkg`** - java **rule**, which organizes generated sources in a "custom" form (expected/defined by third_party build system package, typically gradle or maven).
7. **gradle**-specific rules and macros (to build idiomatic package ready for opensourcing and independent from Bazel):
    1. **`_java_gapic_gradle_pkg`** - **private** java **rule**, used by most other `java*_pkg` (see below) macros to package stuff (i.e. generate artman-like output).
    2. **`java_gapic_proto_gradle_pkg`** - java **macro**, which accepts previously built `java_library` (proto classes, and, optionally, resource names classes) and uses other rules to generate java `proto-google-cloud-<service>` packages (identical to the output provided by artman, archived in `.tar.gz` format). The `.tar.gz` format is chosen because it allows to reuse existing `pkg_tar` Bazel rule (unfortunately Bazel does not have native support for packaging into `.zip` yet).
    3. **`java_gapic_grpc_gradle_pkg`** - java **macro**, which accepts previously built `java_library` (grpc classes) and uses other rules to generate java `grpc-google-cloud-<service>` packages (identical to the output provided by artman, archived in `.tar.gz` format).
    4. **`java_gapic_gradle_pkg`** - java **macro**, which accepts previously built `java_library` (gapic classes) uses other rules to generate java `gapic-google-cloud-<service>` packages (identical to the output provided by artman, archived in `.tar.gz` format).
    5. **`java_gapic_assembly_gradle_pkg`** - java **macro**, which accept other `*_pkg` targets as input and generates complete self-contained assembly of java clients (identical to the output of batch generation in artman, archived in `.tar.gz` format). The assembly then can be built (this time by a third_party tool `gradle` (not `bazel` itself)) by simply calling `./gradlew clean test`.

### Generated Artifacts Dependencies Resolution
#### Java
1. **`java/java_gapic_pkg_repos.bzl`** - this file essentially replaces `artman_<service>.yaml`, `dependencies.yaml` and `api_defaults.yaml` by using `bazel` itself for dependencies resolution. Previously the dependencies were handled in a form of yaml config values, when they are not validated to: 1) be correct/exist; 2) match generated code; 3) be sufficient/redundant. To deal with dependencies versions mismatch, the `repo_mapping` feature of Bazel is supposed to be used (enabled by `--experimental_enable_repo_mapping` command line argument).

Commit message:

Bazel-based codegen #6 (Go support) (#2526)
Adds the following rules:

- `go_gapic_library` - generate & compile Golang gapic library
- `go_gapic_assembly_pkg` - package gapic client sources, protobuf and grpc stubs in a format identical to produced by artman (ensures feature parity with artman and easy migration from it)

Also add missing license headers to existing .bzl files and make few smaller changes to core rules.
Rename go_gapic_repos.bzl -> go_gapic_repositories, java_gapic_pkg_repos.bzl -> java_gapic_repositories.bzl

Optimize Bazel CircleCI configuration:
 - reduce number of used cores to 1.0;
 - revert max mem usage to 3072;
 - specify host_jvm_args to Xmx512

rules_gapic/README.md, after:

## GAPIC Generator [Bazel](https://www.bazel.build/) Integration 

### Requirements

- Bazel version `0.16.0+` (with `--experimental_enable_repo_mapping` turned on).
- Linux (may work on other platforms, but this haven't been tested).

### Usage

The rules will call `gapic-generator` and do all the necessary pre- and post- generation steps to generate a fully-functional client library for a specified service API in a specified language (currently only `Java` is supported). The rules are expected to be used from within a Bazel workspace containing service interface definitions in one of the following formats: 
- **`proto/grpc`** format, defined by `<service>.proto`, `<service>.yaml` and `<service>_gapic.yaml` files; see [googleapis](https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis) repository for an example.
- **`discovery/httpjson`** format, defined by `<service>.json` and `<service>_gapic.yaml`; see [discovery-artifact-manager](https://github.com/googleapis/discovery-artifact-manager) repository for an example. 

### Rules and Macros

#### Cross-language
1. **`gapic_srcjar`** - cross-language (main) **rule** which calls gapic-generator, supplies necessary input files to it (like `gapic_<service>.yaml`, `<service>.yaml` or `discovery_doc.json` in case of discogapic generation). Notice that `artman_<service>.yaml` (googleapis), `dependencies.yaml` and `api_defaults.yaml` (gapic-generator) and `package_yaml2` (generated by artman from artman and service yamls) become obsolete (not required at any stage). The chosen name tries to follow Bazel best practices, in which a rule name must be a noun, which represents the output of the rule.
2. **`proto_custom_library`** - cross-language **rule**, which allows: 1) calling `protoc` with custom plugins; 2) specifying the output files format and file extension (essential for consuming (down the chain) rules); 3) accepting `proto_library` targets as inputs (to adhere to Bazel protobuf best practices and stay consistent with everything else). Unfortunately Bazel does not have native support for the features above and a similar rule in protobuf repo [proto_gen](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/protobuf.bzl#L173) satisfies the 1st requirement/feature but not the other two.  Notice that this rule does not replace `proto_library`, it is additive to it (it uses `proto_library`'s output as input, while `proto_library` has raw proto files as input).
3. **`proto_library_with_info`** - cross-language **macro**, which wraps `proto_custom_library` and provides "fat" proto descriptor. This is not supported by native `proto_library` rule but is required by gapic-generator to include documentation from protos and to overcome the limitation of "only one" desc file as an input in gapic-generator (dependencies' proto descriptors must be supplied somehow, here they are embedded in one big descriptor which then goes to gapic-gen as input).

#### Java
1. **`java_gapic_srcjar`** - java **rule**, which does all the java-specific post-processing of the java gapic-generator output (produced by `gapic_srcjar` rule). This includes running formatter and splitting output into main and test packages (a design decision/assumption made, but it is essential (though not strictly required) for proper building of the artifacts within Bazel).
2. **`java_gapic_library`** - java **macro**, which subsequently calls `gapic_srcjar` to generate sources, then `java_gapic_srcjar` to post-process them, then  native `java_library` (twice, one for main and one for tests) to build java binary lib from the generated output within Bazel. This is **the rule**, which intends to put gapic-generator on same level of tools integration as protoc (`java_proto_library`) and grpc (`java_grpc_library`).
3. **`java_discogapic_library`** - java **macro**, which is very similar to `java_gapic_library` and does same, but for discogapic libraries.
4. **`java_resource_name_proto_library`** - java **macro**, which uses `proto_custom_library` and `java_library` rules to generate resource names sources and then calls `java_library` to build the corresponding library from the generated sources. Notice that resource names can be generated and compiled as a standalone library (do not have to be  a part of `proto-<service>` library).
5. **`java_gapic_build_configs_pkg`** - java **rule**, which is responsible for generating (from templates) build-specific resources for third_party build systems (like gradle). For example it is used to generate `build.gradle` and `settings.gradle` from templates. 
6. **`java_gapic_srcs_pkg`** - java **rule**, which organizes generated sources in a "custom" form (expected/defined by third_party build system package, typically gradle or maven).
7. **gradle**-specific rules and macros (to build idiomatic package ready for opensourcing and independent from Bazel):
    1. **`_java_gapic_gradle_pkg`** - **private** java **rule**, used by most other `java*_pkg` (see below) macros to package stuff (i.e. generate artman-like output).
    2. **`java_gapic_proto_gradle_pkg`** - java **macro**, which accepts previously built `java_library` (proto classes, and, optionally, resource names classes) and uses other rules to generate java `proto-google-cloud-<service>` packages (identical to the output provided by artman, archived in `.tar.gz` format). The `.tar.gz` format is chosen because it allows to reuse existing `pkg_tar` Bazel rule (unfortunately Bazel does not have native support for packaging into `.zip` yet).
    3. **`java_gapic_grpc_gradle_pkg`** - java **macro**, which accepts previously built `java_library` (grpc classes) and uses other rules to generate java `grpc-google-cloud-<service>` packages (identical to the output provided by artman, archived in `.tar.gz` format).
    4. **`java_gapic_gradle_pkg`** - java **macro**, which accepts previously built `java_library` (gapic classes) uses other rules to generate java `gapic-google-cloud-<service>` packages (identical to the output provided by artman, archived in `.tar.gz` format).
    5. **`java_gapic_assembly_gradle_pkg`** - java **macro**, which accept other `*_pkg` targets as input and generates complete self-contained assembly of java clients (identical to the output of batch generation in artman, archived in `.tar.gz` format). The assembly then can be built (this time by a third_party tool `gradle` (not `bazel` itself)) by simply calling `./gradlew clean test`.

#### Go
1. **`go_gapic_srcjar`** - golang **macro**, which first calls `gapic_srcjar` to generate the source code, then calls an internal rule which does all the golang-specific postprocessing of the code (formatting using `gofmt` tool, splitting the code into main, test and smoke test `.srcjar` (zip format) archives).

2. **`go_gapic_library`** - golang **macro**, which calls `go_gapic_srcjar` to generate and postprocess gapic library code, then calls `go_library` rule from [rules_go](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_go) bazel extensions to compile the generated code. Also this macros declares directories and then unpacks the sources for main, tests and smoke tests into those directories (so them can be consumed by `go_library` and `go_test` which do not accept `.srcjar` as an input).

3. **`go_gapic_assembly_pkg`** - golang **macro** which accepts the previously built `go_gapic_library` (including the `-test.srcjar` and `-smoke-test.srcjar`) and `go_proto_library` artifacts and packages them into an idiomatic (for Go) package which is ready for opensourcing and is independent from Bazel.


### Generated Artifacts Dependencies Resolution
#### Java
1. **`java/java_gapic_repositories.bzl`** - this file essentially replaces `artman_<service>.yaml`, `dependencies.yaml` and `api_defaults.yaml` by using `bazel` itself for dependencies resolution. Previously the dependencies were handled in a form of yaml config values, when they are not validated to: 1) be correct/exist; 2) match generated code; 3) be sufficient/redundant. To deal with dependencies versions mismatch, the `repo_mapping` feature of Bazel is supposed to be used (enabled by `--experimental_enable_repo_mapping` command line argument).

#### Go
1. **`go/go_gapic_repositories.bzl`** - this file declares the Go-specific dependencies of the generated output and is supposed to be included in the WORKSPACE of the consuming workspace (for examples in `googleapis`).
